Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Science fiction author Dean Ing has been
putting out some exciting and provocative books in the past few years. Soft
Targets was published as a novel in 1979. Then came the very popular Anasazi in
1980 and Systemic Shock in 1981. And he's got a bunch more on the way. But Ing
actually started publishing science fiction a long time ago. We asked him about
his early stories. My first published story was early in 1955. I wrote it in
1954. It was called "Tight Squeeze". And I know it's in some old compilations of
stories back in the 50s. And about a year and a half later, I guess in the
summer of 1956, I wrote one, I had one published, it is, called "Red Rover". Now,
"Red Rover" has been reprinted in an anthology about two years ago. But "Tight
Squeeze", I believe, has never been reprinted, which is not too surprising. As a
story, it isn't all that good. As a suggestion of the kinds of problems that a
mechanic was liable to have in free fall, working in an orbital situation. It
was, I think, a pretty good story. Dean Ing quit writing science fiction for
almost two decades. We asked him why. I quit writing, then, for almost 20 years
because I had sent another story, which was clearly a think piece, really a
complaint about the way we were centralizing in bigger and bigger cities. The
story I wrote, which I can't even recall the name of now, it was turned down by
Horace Gold at Galaxy. And Horace's scribbled complaint to me was that it was
terrific storytelling, but not much of a story. That I was, it was perfectly
clear that I was up on a soapbox haranguing the reader. And Horace is just
entertaining. That's all we want. Well, that made me mad. I didn't think that my
particular position in life was as an entertainer. And I realized if I couldn't
make the things that I had to say interesting enough so that I could entertain
and inform at the same time, then I wouldn't write. And that's the truth. I
couldn't. I didn't know the craft that well at the time. I could either
entertain you or I could write some information down. Ing did a number of
things during his time away from science fiction. Designing and building race
cars was one of them, but principally he went to work as an aerospace engineer.
After a number of years, though, he grew tired of that type of employment.
And so I got more and more out of that, did more and more design work,
development of all kinds of notions in my home lab. Not just building racing
cars, but developing the fiberglass rivet technique, developing a multi
-manometric gauge gadget that you could put on a prototype automobile and drive
the car at various speeds on a freeway and get wind tunnel data from it. Things
like that. I simply wanted to do it, and I never had much opportunity to get
anything out of it through the industries that I worked in. So I decided to head
for those guys. I would do all my work on my own. We'll talk about Dean Ing's
fiction next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with
us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Dean Ing's science fiction is usually set
in the near future, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Anasazi is set in 1996,
systemic shock around the same time, and soft targets in the early 1980s. We
wondered why he worked in that time frame so often. I think that the 80s and 90s
give me a whole lot more clarity. It's really tough to see what's going on, to
have much of a clear vision as to what's going to happen 30 or 40 years from
now. I have, from over the 1950s, I've had some fairly clear notions as to what
the future would hold, and I have a pretty good batting average on that. Just
for one example, to look at the, oh, my very short and not very important career
in sports car racing. I quit after two or three years and wrote some letters,
open letters to editors and so on, of the racing fraternity, saying that our
overuse of gasoline and this waste of energy was really not in the best interest
of the human race, and we were all going to be sorry for it. This was in 1961
and 62. And I set about trying to demonstrate how much better machines we could
have than we did have. Well, the cars that I built, one of them is out in my
garage right now. It looks like next year's Porsche, and it's 20 years old. My
perceptions of what was going to happen 15, 20, 25 years in the future have been
fairly good, and I would rather write about things that I feel more firmly
familiar with. It's just awfully hard for me to figure out what's going to
happen in the year 2010, let's say. However, I am working on it. Ng's stories
are all built around strong thematic ideas, things like nuclear war, the power
of the media, and the medical profession. We asked him how he goes about writing
a story. Does the theme come first, then the characters and plot, or is it the
other way around? It is the theme usually that comes first. I have on occasion,
sometimes just as an exercise, or sometimes just for fun, or because a friend
will ask me to do so. You know, like there is an anthology that Larry Niven did
based on his book called The Magic Goes Away. Now, I don't do much fantasy, but
Larry's fantasy was a very clever one, a very good one. It even had, in a sense,
a scientific basis for magic. And he asked me to do a story for a sequel.
And I was very happy to do that. But it's one of the few stories that I've
written in which I did not have what I consider an important theme to start
with. So as you first suggested, yes, I'll usually take a theme, then build plot
and characters that go along with it.
Ing's style is extremely fast-paced and exciting.
We asked him if that skill came naturally to him, or if he had to work at it.
I worked my buns off to get it, actually, Daryl. You've got to remember that I
did get my doctorate in communication theory. And media theory is a fairly good
-sized slug of that. And studying men like William Stevenson and his play theory
of mass communication and so on taught me a lot about the kinds of entertainment
that an audience is liable to focus on. So, again, as you said, it's something
that I had to work at. It didn't just come naturally. Next time, we'll talk with
Dean Ing about his novella, Anasazi.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. One of Dean Ing's most popular works is his
novella, Anasazi. The plot concerns a group of aliens who have been stranded on
Earth centuries ago and have taken over the bodies of some Pueblo Indians. The
aliens are long-lived, and over the centuries, using the bodies of various
hosts, they attempt to build a communication device to bring more of their kind
to Earth. The time period of the narrative is the 1990s, when the aliens are
almost ready to finish their communicator. They're discovered by an
archaeologist, the Pueblo Indian himself, and they attempt to kill them so that
they can remain undiscovered. We asked Ing to tell us about the impetus behind
Anasazi. Well, for many years, I've been interested in North American and
Central American archaeology and anthropology. My master's degree was in
American Indian Scientology. I had been in the Anasazi area numerous times and
was aware of this mystery that still exists as to why those people moved down to
the Anasazi. In fact, I should be more specific. The mystery as to why the
American Indians who lived near the cliff dwellings, why they moved down under
those cliffs and made those cliff dwellings to begin with. We know why they
left, why they abandoned the cliff dwellings, because of a great draught that
was starving them out for 25 years or so. We know about the unbroken tradition
of life in that area for centuries and centuries before they built the cliff
dwellings. We still do not know. We do not know today why they built those
dwellings themselves. It would seem, well, perhaps they were afraid of
something. They were retreating from something. Yet we have no significant
information as to what they were retreating from. Well, it was my idea to set up
a scenario that would explain why these people abandoned their homes, their
accessible places up on top of the mesas, and moved down into a sort of
defensive fortification.
Anasazi is an exciting book, an alien horror story, really. Ing doesn't usually
write about aliens in his fiction, so he asked him why he did so in Anasazi. The
most likely answer I could think of to make it a horror story about a kind of
possession that would possess American Indian kids and turn this thing from a
science fiction western detective love story into a science fiction western love
horror story. I wanted to try to do just about everything in a very short novel.
It was an exercise in part to see how many kinds of a story I could write
without making it seem jumbled. Even though Anasazi is a real thriller, it's an
accurate piece of anthropology in his approach to the Pueblo Indian culture. In
fact, Ing says he had access to some very current research on the Pueblo
Indians. A friend of mine who was doing his doctoral dissertation on witchcraft,
which was in Taos, Pueblo.
And I was aware of all this, and I had access to his tape recordings. And while
he was setting about the early stages of his doctrinal dissertation, I was
already reading those tapes, making notes and so on, so that the book, Anasazi,
which came out before his dissertation did, had information that was not in the
literature yet. What it amounted to was that I had tomorrow morning's newspaper,
and when you have tomorrow morning's newspaper, you always seem smarter than you
are. We'll continue our conversation with Dean Ing on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Dean Ing's first novel, Soft Targets, was
published in 1979. It's a carefully plotted, very fast narrative about
international terrorism, and it's set in this decade. The basic theme of this
story concerns the media, particularly television. Since the events Ng creates
for the plot are so real and convincing, and since the technology is present-day
stuff, the novel hardly seems to be science fiction. We asked Ng if he considers
it to be science fiction. Yes, I do, because it's sociological science fiction.
There's engineering science fiction, you know, the hard sciences with hardware.
And there are the, let's say, quasi-sciences, like psychology, sociology, and so
on. Just as sure as 1984 was science fiction, so was Soft Targets. It involved
some scientific hypotheses about media theory. That was truly the initial
impetus for the story, was this theme of what we could do about this uneasy
marriage between terrorism and television. That was a problem I saw in 1971, and
I saw no solution for it that would work in a free society, until about 76, I
guess. In 75 or 76, by still mulling the idea over, mulling over the problem, I
came across this little set of hypotheses about how you could use the model of
warfare, the media going to war against the terrorists, and see what media do
when they go to war. What have they done in the past? How easy would it be to do
it again? Would it be effective? And my conclusions were, yes, it would be. So
then I wrote the novel. Ing takes the television industry to task for helping to
foment terrorism by giving it spectacular coverage. He believes the media should
meet its responsibility and actively fight terrorism. Ng's idea regarding media
and terrorism seems to be both logical and acceptable. Not by the media people,
it's not. They have the most selfish of reasons not to want that to be
considered true. And, of course, if they can deny it, then they can continue
being irresponsible, which is, of course, what they want to do all along.
A number of people in the top of our network media, I know that they have come
across Soft Targets, and they are none too pleased with it.
Soft Targets is so vivid and exciting as a narrative that it seems a natural
choice for a movie. Does Ing think it will ever become one? I think, personally,
the chances of it being made into a movie are perhaps one in a hundred. For one
thing, it really
lays too much blame. It's very trenchant. When I say too much, I mean for people
in the media to be comfortable about it.
It raises hell with the media leaders. For one thing, it's not liable to be the
kind of movie that would ever be shown on late-night television because it takes
television so much to task. Why would the TV people want to beat themselves
about their head and shoulders by showing a movie that snarls about their
irresponsibility? Chances are they wouldn't. And when people make movies these
days, they are very clearly thinking about the TV rights later on. More with
Dean Ing on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Dean Ing's Science Fiction is heavy on
ideas. All of his stories, even though they're exciting and fast-paced, are
based upon ideas that Ing feels strongly about. And his stories are all carefully
extrapolated. All good examples of the classic question behind good science
fiction, what if? Ing is a fine writer, obviously talented and in command of any
idea he pursues. We asked him why he sometimes didn't turn his talents toward
fantasy. I'm not really interested very much in writing about things that I
don't believe in. That is, that I do not believe possibly. You know, I would
define fantasy as something that we know to be impossible. Now, of course, there
are some things that we quote, know, unquote, to be impossible that turn out
they're possible after all. But to the degree that I believe them to be
impossible, then I believe making scenarios based on the impossible is one
definition of fantasy. And I have nothing against it for other people to do it.
But there are so many issues, real issues about important things that I think
need to be struggled with, that the reader, the public in general needs to
struggle with these issues, with these real things. I think so much that I don't
really have the time for Never Never Land. It's here in now land or soon to come
land that I worry about a lot. I have children. I have grandchildren. I worry
about those people. I worry about what's going to happen to them. I don't want
the future to spring on them like some great animal and cut them all up. I would
like us to be ready and armed for the unpleasant parts of the future. And so I
don't feel that I have the time to spend on fantasy. We asked his opinion on the
value of science fiction. I feel that science fiction is probably the most
valuable fiction available to anyone today. Certainly it's our buffer against
future shock if we'll only use it that way. It's an insulator, a lightning rod
if you will. Science fiction does not have to be, but certainly can be,
a means of making you ready for the future before you find yourself suddenly in
it. I was writing about computers and people talking to computers and they're
talking back to them 25 years ago. Now I have a computer at home. It had not
occurred to me 25 years ago that I really would have one at home. I would have
thought that was only for people like Howard Hughes. But sure enough, just about
everybody can have one today if you want one badly enough. Science fiction has
that very powerful value. It can also let you escape. It certainly can be escape
literature when you simply need that kind of entertainment. Ng's concern for the
future is seen in many areas besides his science fiction. He's an inventor, for
instance, who offers his ideas freely to the public without seeking patents. Ing
can be categorized as a futurist, too, as seen in his latest concern. And the
thing that I'm moving on toward is what some people call the L5 situation, or
the L5 scenario, having to do with habitats, with colonies literally built in
space, so that we do not have to live, all of us, on Earth permanently. I think
that the human race's next major frontier is in building habitats out beyond
Earth's atmosphere. That is a very important notion to me, and that's where I'm
doing a lot of my thinking today.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.